2_docker_sql/README.md, before:

## Commands 

All the commands from the video

Downloading the data

```bash
wget https://github.com/DataTalksClub/nyc-tlc-data/releases/download/yellow/yellow_tripdata_2021-01.csv.gz 
```

> Note: now the CSV data is stored in the `csv_backup` folder, not `trip+date` like previously

### Shells

Before creating an `.yaml` file, week 1 will need 4 different terminals -

-  To run or start up docker
-  Interactive shell to the database using `pgcli` OR to initialise `pgadmin`
-  Run Python commands on virual environment
-  Git tasks, linux OS commands

### Running Postgres with Docker

#### Windows

Running Postgres on Windows (note the full path)

```bash
docker run -it \
  -e POSTGRES_USER="root" \
  -e POSTGRES_PASSWORD="root" \
  -e POSTGRES_DB="ny_taxi" \
  -v c:/Users/alexe/git/data-engineering-zoomcamp/week_1_basics_n_setup/2_docker_sql/ny_taxi_postgres_data:/var/lib/postgresql/data \
  -p 5432:5432 \
  postgres:13
```

If you have the following error:

```
docker run -it \
  -e POSTGRES_USER="root" \
  -e POSTGRES_PASSWORD="root" \
  -e POSTGRES_DB="ny_taxi" \
  -v e:/zoomcamp/data_engineer/week_1_fundamentals/2_docker_sql/ny_taxi_postgres_data:/var/lib/postgresql/data  \
  -p 5432:5432 \
  postgres:13

docker: Error response from daemon: invalid mode: \Program Files\Git\var\lib\postgresql\data.
See 'docker run --help'.
```

Change the mounting path. Replace it with the following:

```
-v /e/zoomcamp/...:/var/lib/postgresql/data
```

#### Linux and MacOS


```bash
docker run -it \
  -e POSTGRES_USER="root" \
  -e POSTGRES_PASSWORD="root" \
  -e POSTGRES_DB="ny_taxi" \
  -v $(pwd)/ny_taxi_postgres_data:/var/lib/postgresql/data \
  -p 5432:5432 \
  postgres:13
```

If you see that `ny_taxi_postgres_data` is empty after running
the container, try these:

* Deleting the folder and running Docker again (Docker will re-create the folder)
* Adjust the permissions of the folder by running `sudo chmod a+rwx ny_taxi_postgres_data`


### CLI for Postgres

Installing `pgcli`

```bash
pip install pgcli
```

If you have problems installing `pgcli` with the command above, try this:

```bash
conda install -c conda-forge pgcli
pip install -U mycli
```

Using `pgcli` to connect to Postgres

```bash
pgcli -h localhost -p 5432 -u root -d ny_taxi
```

### Setting up Python in vscode

We can install all the python libraries in a virtual environment. To start a virtual env - 
```
python3 -m venv .venv
```

To run the script

```
python ingest_data.py
```

### NY Trips Dataset

Dataset:

* https://www1.nyc.gov/site/tlc/about/tlc-trip-record-data.page
* https://www1.nyc.gov/assets/tlc/downloads/pdf/data_dictionary_trip_records_yellow.pdf

> According to the [TLC data website](https://www1.nyc.gov/site/tlc/about/tlc-trip-record-data.page),
> from 05/13/2022, the data will be in ```.parquet``` format instead of ```.csv```
> The website has provided a useful [link](https://www1.nyc.gov/assets/tlc/downloads/pdf/working_parquet_format.pdf) with sample steps to read ```.parquet``` file and convert it to Pandas data frame.
>
> You can use the csv backup located here, https://github.com/DataTalksClub/nyc-tlc-data/releases/download/yellow/yellow_tripdata_2021-01.csv.gz, to follow along with the video.
```
$ aws s3 ls s3://nyc-tlc
                           PRE csv_backup/
                           PRE misc/
                           PRE trip data/
```

You can refer the `data-loading-parquet.ipynb` and `data-loading-parquet.py` for code to handle both csv and parquet files. (The lookup zones table which is needed later in this course is a csv file)
> Note: You will need to install the `pyarrow` library. (add it to your Dockerfile)

### Download the 2021 CSV

```
wget https://github.com/DataTalksClub/nyc-tlc-data/releases/download/yellow/yellow_tripdata_2021-01.csv.gz
```

To view the csv file, rather a head of the data
```
less <file_name>

head -n 100
```

### pgAdmin

Running pgAdmin

```bash
docker run -it \
  -e PGADMIN_DEFAULT_EMAIL="admin@admin.com" \
  -e PGADMIN_DEFAULT_PASSWORD="root" \
  -p 8080:80 \
  dpage/pgadmin4
```

### Running Postgres and pgAdmin together

The reason for doing this is because currently postgres and pgadmin are running in different containers. These containers are required to be in the same network. So we create a network as below

```bash
docker network create pg-network
```

Run Postgres (change the path)

```bash
docker run -it \
  -e POSTGRES_USER="root" \
  -e POSTGRES_PASSWORD="root" \
  -e POSTGRES_DB="ny_taxi" \
  -v c:/Users/alexe/git/data-engineering-zoomcamp/week_1_basics_n_setup/2_docker_sql/ny_taxi_postgres_data:/var/lib/postgresql/data \
  -p 5432:5432 \
  --network=pg-network \
  --name pg-database \
  postgres:13
```

Run pgAdmin

```bash
docker run -it \
  -e PGADMIN_DEFAULT_EMAIL="admin@admin.com" \
  -e PGADMIN_DEFAULT_PASSWORD="root" \
  -p 8080:80 \
  --network=pg-network \
  --name pgadmin-2 \
  dpage/pgadmin4
```

#### Trouble shooting

- Ensure both the containers are in the same network by running 
```
docker network inspect pg-network
```
- Then restart the container `docker restart vigilant_hypatia` and inspect the network again using the above command. 
- Ensure that both pg-database and vigilant_hypatia are both listed

### Data ingestion

Running locally

```bash
URL="https://github.com/DataTalksClub/nyc-tlc-data/releases/download/yellow/yellow_tripdata_2021-01.csv.gz"

python ingest_data.py \
  --user=root \
  --password=root \
  --host=localhost \
  --port=5432 \
  --db=ny_taxi \
  --table_name=yellow_taxi_trips \
  --url=${URL}
```

Build the image

```bash
docker build -t taxi_ingest:v001 .
```

On Linux you may have a problem building it:

```
error checking context: 'can't stat '/home/name/data_engineering/ny_taxi_postgres_data''.
```

You can solve it with `.dockerignore`:

* Create a folder `data`
* Move `ny_taxi_postgres_data` to `data` (you might need to use `sudo` for that)
* Map `-v $(pwd)/data/ny_taxi_postgres_data:/var/lib/postgresql/data`
* Create a file `.dockerignore` and add `data` there
* Check [this video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tOr4hTsHOzU&list=PL3MmuxUbc_hJed7dXYoJw8DoCuVHhGEQb) (the middle) for more details 



Run the script with Docker

```bash
URL="https://github.com/DataTalksClub/nyc-tlc-data/releases/download/yellow/yellow_tripdata_2021-01.csv.gz"

docker run -it \
  --network=pg-network \
  taxi_ingest:v001 \
    --user=root \
    --password=root \
    --host=pg-database \
    --port=5432 \
    --db=ny_taxi \
    --table_name=yellow_taxi_trips \
    --url=${URL}
```

### Docker-Compose 

Run it:

```bash
docker-compose up
```

Run in detached mode:

```bash
docker-compose up -d
```

Shutting it down:

```bash
docker-compose down
```

Note: to make pgAdmin configuration persistent, create a folder `data_pgadmin`. Change its permission via

```bash
sudo chown 5050:5050 data_pgadmin
```

and mount it to the `/var/lib/pgadmin` folder:

```yaml
services:
  pgadmin:
    image: dpage/pgadmin4
    volumes:
      - ./data_pgadmin:/var/lib/pgadmin
    ...
```


### SQL Refresher

Pre-Requisites: If you followed the course in the given order,
Docker Compose should already be running with pgdatabase and pgAdmin.

You can run the following code using Jupyter Notebook to ingest the data for Taxi Zones:

```python
import pandas as pd
from sqlalchemy import create_engine

engine = create_engine('postgresql://root:root@localhost:5432/ny_taxi')
engine.connect()

!wget https://github.com/DataTalksClub/nyc-tlc-data/releases/download/misc/taxi_zone_lookup.csv

df_zones = pd.read_csv("taxi_zone_lookup.csv")
df_zones.to_sql(name='zones', con=engine, if_exists='replace')
```

Once done, you can go to http://localhost:8080/browser/ to access pgAdmin.
Don't forget to Right Click on the server or database to refresh it in case you don't see the new table.

Now start querying!

Joining Yellow Taxi table with Zones Lookup table (implicit INNER JOIN)
 
```sql
SELECT
    tpep_pickup_datetime,
    tpep_dropoff_datetime,
    total_amount,
    CONCAT(zpu."Borough", ' | ', zpu."Zone") AS "pickup_loc",
    CONCAT(zdo."Borough", ' | ', zdo."Zone") AS "dropoff_loc"
FROM 
    yellow_taxi_trips t,
    zones zpu,
    zones zdo
WHERE
    t."PULocationID" = zpu."LocationID"
    AND t."DOLocationID" = zdo."LocationID"
LIMIT 100;
```

Joining Yellow Taxi table with Zones Lookup table (Explicit INNER JOIN)

```sql
SELECT
    tpep_pickup_datetime,
    tpep_dropoff_datetime,
    total_amount,
    CONCAT(zpu."Borough", ' | ', zpu."Zone") AS "pickup_loc",
    CONCAT(zdo."Borough", ' | ', zdo."Zone") AS "dropoff_loc"
FROM 
    yellow_taxi_trips t
JOIN 
-- or INNER JOIN but it's less used, when writing JOIN, postgreSQL understands implicitly that we want to use an INNER JOIN
    zones zpu ON t."PULocationID" = zpu."LocationID"
JOIN
    zones zdo ON t."DOLocationID" = zdo."LocationID"
LIMIT 100;
```

Checking for records with NULL Location IDs in the Yellow Taxi table

```sql
SELECT
    tpep_pickup_datetime,
    tpep_dropoff_datetime,
    total_amount,
    "PULocationID",
    "DOLocationID"
FROM 
    yellow_taxi_trips
WHERE
    "PULocationID" IS NULL
    OR "DOLocationID" IS NULL
LIMIT 100;
```

Checking for Location IDs in the Zones table NOT IN the Yellow Taxi table

```sql
SELECT
    tpep_pickup_datetime,
    tpep_dropoff_datetime,
    total_amount,
    "PULocationID",
    "DOLocationID"
FROM 
    yellow_taxi_trips
WHERE
    "DOLocationID" NOT IN (SELECT "LocationID" from zones)
    OR "PULocationID" NOT IN (SELECT "LocationID" from zones)
LIMIT 100;
```

Using LEFT, RIGHT, and OUTER JOINS when some Location IDs are not in either Tables

```sql
DELETE FROM zones WHERE "LocationID" = 142;

SELECT
    tpep_pickup_datetime,
    tpep_dropoff_datetime,
    total_amount,
    CONCAT(zpu."Borough", ' | ', zpu."Zone") AS "pickup_loc",
    CONCAT(zdo."Borough", ' | ', zdo."Zone") AS "dropoff_loc"
FROM 
    yellow_taxi_trips t
LEFT JOIN 
    zones zpu ON t."PULocationID" = zpu."LocationID"
JOIN
    zones zdo ON t."DOLocationID" = zdo."LocationID"
LIMIT 100;
```

```sql
SELECT
    tpep_pickup_datetime,
    tpep_dropoff_datetime,
    total_amount,
    CONCAT(zpu."Borough", ' | ', zpu."Zone") AS "pickup_loc",
    CONCAT(zdo."Borough", ' | ', zdo."Zone") AS "dropoff_loc"
FROM 
    yellow_taxi_trips t
RIGHT JOIN 
    zones zpu ON t."PULocationID" = zpu."LocationID"
JOIN
    zones zdo ON t."DOLocationID" = zdo."LocationID"
LIMIT 100;
```

```sql
SELECT
    tpep_pickup_datetime,
    tpep_dropoff_datetime,
    total_amount,
    CONCAT(zpu."Borough", ' | ', zpu."Zone") AS "pickup_loc",
    CONCAT(zdo."Borough", ' | ', zdo."Zone") AS "dropoff_loc"
FROM 
    yellow_taxi_trips t
OUTER JOIN 
    zones zpu ON t."PULocationID" = zpu."LocationID"
JOIN
    zones zdo ON t."DOLocationID" = zdo."LocationID"
LIMIT 100;
```

Using GROUP BY to calculate number of trips per day

```sql
SELECT
    CAST(tpep_dropoff_datetime AS DATE) AS "day",
    COUNT(1)
FROM 
    yellow_taxi_trips
GROUP BY
    CAST(tpep_dropoff_datetime AS DATE)
LIMIT 100;
```

Using ORDER BY to order the results of your query

```sql
-- Ordering by day

SELECT
    CAST(tpep_dropoff_datetime AS DATE) AS "day",
    COUNT(1)
FROM 
    yellow_taxi_trips
GROUP BY
    CAST(tpep_dropoff_datetime AS DATE)
ORDER BY
    "day" ASC
LIMIT 100;

-- Ordering by count

SELECT
    CAST(tpep_dropoff_datetime AS DATE) AS "day",
    COUNT(1) AS "count"
FROM 
    yellow_taxi_trips
GROUP BY
    CAST(tpep_dropoff_datetime AS DATE)
ORDER BY
    "count" DESC
LIMIT 100;
```

Other kinds of aggregations

```sql
SELECT
    CAST(tpep_dropoff_datetime AS DATE) AS "day",
    COUNT(1) AS "count",
    MAX(total_amount) AS "total_amount",
    MAX(passenger_count) AS "passenger_count"
FROM 
    yellow_taxi_trips
GROUP BY
    CAST(tpep_dropoff_datetime AS DATE)
ORDER BY
    "count" DESC
LIMIT 100;
```

Grouping by multiple fields


```sql
SELECT
    CAST(tpep_dropoff_datetime AS DATE) AS "day",
    "DOLocationID",
    COUNT(1) AS "count",
    MAX(total_amount) AS "total_amount",
    MAX(passenger_count) AS "passenger_count"
FROM 
    yellow_taxi_trips
GROUP BY
    1, 2
ORDER BY
    "day" ASC, 
    "DOLocationID" ASC
LIMIT 100;
```

Commit message:

Day3: Setting up docker for postgres and pgadmin

2_docker_sql/README.md, after:

## Commands 

All the commands from the video

Downloading the data

```bash
wget https://github.com/DataTalksClub/nyc-tlc-data/releases/download/yellow/yellow_tripdata_2021-01.csv.gz 
```

> Note: now the CSV data is stored in the `csv_backup` folder, not `trip+date` like previously

### Shells

Before creating an `.yaml` file, week 1 will need 4 different terminals -

-  To run or start up docker
-  Interactive shell to the database using `pgcli` OR to initialise `pgadmin`
-  Run Python commands on virual environment
-  Git tasks, linux OS commands

### Running Postgres with Docker

#### Windows

Running Postgres on Windows (note the full path)

```bash
docker run -it \
  -e POSTGRES_USER="root" \
  -e POSTGRES_PASSWORD="root" \
  -e POSTGRES_DB="ny_taxi" \
  -v c:/Users/alexe/git/data-engineering-zoomcamp/week_1_basics_n_setup/2_docker_sql/ny_taxi_postgres_data:/var/lib/postgresql/data \
  -p 5432:5432 \
  postgres:13
```

If you have the following error:

```
docker run -it \
  -e POSTGRES_USER="root" \
  -e POSTGRES_PASSWORD="root" \
  -e POSTGRES_DB="ny_taxi" \
  -v e:/zoomcamp/data_engineer/week_1_fundamentals/2_docker_sql/ny_taxi_postgres_data:/var/lib/postgresql/data  \
  -p 5432:5432 \
  postgres:13

docker: Error response from daemon: invalid mode: \Program Files\Git\var\lib\postgresql\data.
See 'docker run --help'.
```

Change the mounting path. Replace it with the following:

```
-v /e/zoomcamp/...:/var/lib/postgresql/data
```

#### Linux and MacOS


```bash
docker run -it \
  -e POSTGRES_USER="root" \
  -e POSTGRES_PASSWORD="root" \
  -e POSTGRES_DB="ny_taxi" \
  -v $(pwd)/ny_taxi_postgres_data:/var/lib/postgresql/data \
  -p 5432:5432 \
  postgres:13
```
The host directory `$(pwd)/ny_taxi_postgres_data` in your local machine is mapped to and the container directory `/var/lib/postgresql/data` where PostgreSQL stores its data.

If you see that `ny_taxi_postgres_data` is empty after running
the container, try these:

* Deleting the folder and running Docker again (Docker will re-create the folder)
* Adjust the permissions of the folder by running `sudo chmod a+rwx ny_taxi_postgres_data`


### CLI for Postgres

Installing `pgcli`

```bash
pip install pgcli
```

If you have problems installing `pgcli` with the command above, try this:

```bash
conda install -c conda-forge pgcli
pip install -U mycli
```

Using `pgcli` to connect to Postgres

```bash
pgcli -h localhost -p 5432 -u root -d ny_taxi
```

### Setting up Python in vscode

We can install all the python libraries in a virtual environment. To start a virtual env - 
```
python3 -m venv .venv
```

To run the script

```
python ingest_data.py
```

### NY Trips Dataset

Dataset:

* https://www1.nyc.gov/site/tlc/about/tlc-trip-record-data.page
* https://www1.nyc.gov/assets/tlc/downloads/pdf/data_dictionary_trip_records_yellow.pdf

> According to the [TLC data website](https://www1.nyc.gov/site/tlc/about/tlc-trip-record-data.page),
> from 05/13/2022, the data will be in ```.parquet``` format instead of ```.csv```
> The website has provided a useful [link](https://www1.nyc.gov/assets/tlc/downloads/pdf/working_parquet_format.pdf) with sample steps to read ```.parquet``` file and convert it to Pandas data frame.
>
> You can use the csv backup located here, https://github.com/DataTalksClub/nyc-tlc-data/releases/download/yellow/yellow_tripdata_2021-01.csv.gz, to follow along with the video.
```
$ aws s3 ls s3://nyc-tlc
                           PRE csv_backup/
                           PRE misc/
                           PRE trip data/
```

You can refer the `data-loading-parquet.ipynb` and `data-loading-parquet.py` for code to handle both csv and parquet files. (The lookup zones table which is needed later in this course is a csv file)
> Note: You will need to install the `pyarrow` library. (add it to your Dockerfile)

### Download the 2021 CSV

```
wget https://github.com/DataTalksClub/nyc-tlc-data/releases/download/yellow/yellow_tripdata_2021-01.csv.gz
```

To view the csv file, rather a head of the data
```
less <file_name>

head -n 100
```

### pgAdmin

Running pgAdmin

```bash
docker run -it \
  -e PGADMIN_DEFAULT_EMAIL="admin@admin.com" \
  -e PGADMIN_DEFAULT_PASSWORD="root" \
  -p 8080:80 \
  dpage/pgadmin4
```

### Running Postgres and pgAdmin together

The reason for doing this is because currently postgres and pgadmin are running in different containers. These containers are required to be in the same network. So we create a network as below

```bash
docker network create pg-network
```

Run Postgres (change the path)

```bash
docker run -it \
  -e POSTGRES_USER="root" \
  -e POSTGRES_PASSWORD="root" \
  -e POSTGRES_DB="ny_taxi" \
  -v c:/Users/alexe/git/data-engineering-zoomcamp/week_1_basics_n_setup/2_docker_sql/ny_taxi_postgres_data:/var/lib/postgresql/data \
  -p 5432:5432 \
  --network=pg-network \
  --name pg-database \
  postgres:13
```

Run pgAdmin

```bash
docker run -it \
  -e PGADMIN_DEFAULT_EMAIL="admin@admin.com" \
  -e PGADMIN_DEFAULT_PASSWORD="root" \
  -p 8080:80 \
  --network=pg-network \
  --name pgadmin-2 \
  dpage/pgadmin4
```

#### Trouble shooting

- Ensure both the containers are in the same network by running 
```
docker network inspect pg-network
```
- Then restart the container `docker restart vigilant_hypatia` and inspect the network again using the above command. 
- Ensure that both pg-database and vigilant_hypatia are both listed

### Docker Compose

From this section, we do not need to use multiple terminals for `pgadmin` and `postgres`. We can simply run both the containers using the `docker-compose` commands - 

To start/stop the containers -  

```
docker-compose up


docker-compose down
```

### Data ingestion

Running locally

```bash
URL="https://github.com/DataTalksClub/nyc-tlc-data/releases/download/yellow/yellow_tripdata_2021-01.csv.gz"

python ingest_data.py \
  --user=root \
  --password=root \
  --host=localhost \
  --port=5432 \
  --db=ny_taxi \
  --table_name=yellow_taxi_trips \
  --url=${URL}
```

Build the image

```bash
docker build -t taxi_ingest:v001 .
```

On Linux you may have a problem building it:

```
error checking context: 'can't stat '/home/name/data_engineering/ny_taxi_postgres_data''.
```

You can solve it with `.dockerignore`:

* Create a folder `data`
* Move `ny_taxi_postgres_data` to `data` (you might need to use `sudo` for that)
* Map `-v $(pwd)/data/ny_taxi_postgres_data:/var/lib/postgresql/data`
* Create a file `.dockerignore` and add `data` there
* Check [this video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tOr4hTsHOzU&list=PL3MmuxUbc_hJed7dXYoJw8DoCuVHhGEQb) (the middle) for more details 



Run the script with Docker

```bash
URL="https://github.com/DataTalksClub/nyc-tlc-data/releases/download/yellow/yellow_tripdata_2021-01.csv.gz"

docker run -it \
  --network=pg-network \
  taxi_ingest:v001 \
    --user=root \
    --password=root \
    --host=pg-database \
    --port=5432 \
    --db=ny_taxi \
    --table_name=yellow_taxi_trips \
    --url=${URL}
```

### Docker-Compose 

Run it:

```bash
docker-compose up
```

Run in detached mode:

```bash
docker-compose up -d
```

Shutting it down:

```bash
docker-compose down
```

Note: to make pgAdmin configuration persistent, create a folder `data_pgadmin`. Change its permission via

```bash
sudo chown 5050:5050 data_pgadmin
```

and mount it to the `/var/lib/pgadmin` folder:

```yaml
services:
  pgadmin:
    image: dpage/pgadmin4
    volumes:
      - ./data_pgadmin:/var/lib/pgadmin
    ...
```


### SQL Refresher

Pre-Requisites: If you followed the course in the given order,
Docker Compose should already be running with pgdatabase and pgAdmin.

You can run the following code using Jupyter Notebook to ingest the data for Taxi Zones:

```python
import pandas as pd
from sqlalchemy import create_engine

engine = create_engine('postgresql://root:root@localhost:5432/ny_taxi')
engine.connect()

!wget https://github.com/DataTalksClub/nyc-tlc-data/releases/download/misc/taxi_zone_lookup.csv

df_zones = pd.read_csv("taxi_zone_lookup.csv")
df_zones.to_sql(name='zones', con=engine, if_exists='replace')
```

Once done, you can go to http://localhost:8080/browser/ to access pgAdmin.
Don't forget to Right Click on the server or database to refresh it in case you don't see the new table.

Now start querying!

Joining Yellow Taxi table with Zones Lookup table (implicit INNER JOIN)
 
```sql
SELECT
    tpep_pickup_datetime,
    tpep_dropoff_datetime,
    total_amount,
    CONCAT(zpu."Borough", ' | ', zpu."Zone") AS "pickup_loc",
    CONCAT(zdo."Borough", ' | ', zdo."Zone") AS "dropoff_loc"
FROM 
    yellow_taxi_trips t,
    zones zpu,
    zones zdo
WHERE
    t."PULocationID" = zpu."LocationID"
    AND t."DOLocationID" = zdo."LocationID"
LIMIT 100;
```

Joining Yellow Taxi table with Zones Lookup table (Explicit INNER JOIN)

```sql
SELECT
    tpep_pickup_datetime,
    tpep_dropoff_datetime,
    total_amount,
    CONCAT(zpu."Borough", ' | ', zpu."Zone") AS "pickup_loc",
    CONCAT(zdo."Borough", ' | ', zdo."Zone") AS "dropoff_loc"
FROM 
    yellow_taxi_trips t
JOIN 
-- or INNER JOIN but it's less used, when writing JOIN, postgreSQL understands implicitly that we want to use an INNER JOIN
    zones zpu ON t."PULocationID" = zpu."LocationID"
JOIN
    zones zdo ON t."DOLocationID" = zdo."LocationID"
LIMIT 100;
```

Checking for records with NULL Location IDs in the Yellow Taxi table

```sql
SELECT
    tpep_pickup_datetime,
    tpep_dropoff_datetime,
    total_amount,
    "PULocationID",
    "DOLocationID"
FROM 
    yellow_taxi_trips
WHERE
    "PULocationID" IS NULL
    OR "DOLocationID" IS NULL
LIMIT 100;
```

Checking for Location IDs in the Zones table NOT IN the Yellow Taxi table

```sql
SELECT
    tpep_pickup_datetime,
    tpep_dropoff_datetime,
    total_amount,
    "PULocationID",
    "DOLocationID"
FROM 
    yellow_taxi_trips
WHERE
    "DOLocationID" NOT IN (SELECT "LocationID" from zones)
    OR "PULocationID" NOT IN (SELECT "LocationID" from zones)
LIMIT 100;
```

Using LEFT, RIGHT, and OUTER JOINS when some Location IDs are not in either Tables

```sql
DELETE FROM zones WHERE "LocationID" = 142;

SELECT
    tpep_pickup_datetime,
    tpep_dropoff_datetime,
    total_amount,
    CONCAT(zpu."Borough", ' | ', zpu."Zone") AS "pickup_loc",
    CONCAT(zdo."Borough", ' | ', zdo."Zone") AS "dropoff_loc"
FROM 
    yellow_taxi_trips t
LEFT JOIN 
    zones zpu ON t."PULocationID" = zpu."LocationID"
JOIN
    zones zdo ON t."DOLocationID" = zdo."LocationID"
LIMIT 100;
```

```sql
SELECT
    tpep_pickup_datetime,
    tpep_dropoff_datetime,
    total_amount,
    CONCAT(zpu."Borough", ' | ', zpu."Zone") AS "pickup_loc",
    CONCAT(zdo."Borough", ' | ', zdo."Zone") AS "dropoff_loc"
FROM 
    yellow_taxi_trips t
RIGHT JOIN 
    zones zpu ON t."PULocationID" = zpu."LocationID"
JOIN
    zones zdo ON t."DOLocationID" = zdo."LocationID"
LIMIT 100;
```

```sql
SELECT
    tpep_pickup_datetime,
    tpep_dropoff_datetime,
    total_amount,
    CONCAT(zpu."Borough", ' | ', zpu."Zone") AS "pickup_loc",
    CONCAT(zdo."Borough", ' | ', zdo."Zone") AS "dropoff_loc"
FROM 
    yellow_taxi_trips t
OUTER JOIN 
    zones zpu ON t."PULocationID" = zpu."LocationID"
JOIN
    zones zdo ON t."DOLocationID" = zdo."LocationID"
LIMIT 100;
```

Using GROUP BY to calculate number of trips per day

```sql
SELECT
    CAST(tpep_dropoff_datetime AS DATE) AS "day",
    COUNT(1)
FROM 
    yellow_taxi_trips
GROUP BY
    CAST(tpep_dropoff_datetime AS DATE)
LIMIT 100;
```

Using ORDER BY to order the results of your query

```sql
-- Ordering by day

SELECT
    CAST(tpep_dropoff_datetime AS DATE) AS "day",
    COUNT(1)
FROM 
    yellow_taxi_trips
GROUP BY
    CAST(tpep_dropoff_datetime AS DATE)
ORDER BY
    "day" ASC
LIMIT 100;

-- Ordering by count

SELECT
    CAST(tpep_dropoff_datetime AS DATE) AS "day",
    COUNT(1) AS "count"
FROM 
    yellow_taxi_trips
GROUP BY
    CAST(tpep_dropoff_datetime AS DATE)
ORDER BY
    "count" DESC
LIMIT 100;
```

Other kinds of aggregations

```sql
SELECT
    CAST(tpep_dropoff_datetime AS DATE) AS "day",
    COUNT(1) AS "count",
    MAX(total_amount) AS "total_amount",
    MAX(passenger_count) AS "passenger_count"
FROM 
    yellow_taxi_trips
GROUP BY
    CAST(tpep_dropoff_datetime AS DATE)
ORDER BY
    "count" DESC
LIMIT 100;
```

Grouping by multiple fields


```sql
SELECT
    CAST(tpep_dropoff_datetime AS DATE) AS "day",
    "DOLocationID",
    COUNT(1) AS "count",
    MAX(total_amount) AS "total_amount",
    MAX(passenger_count) AS "passenger_count"
FROM 
    yellow_taxi_trips
GROUP BY
    1, 2
ORDER BY
    "day" ASC, 
    "DOLocationID" ASC
LIMIT 100;
```
